Project: RV-DIS — RISC-V Dual-Issue SIMD Processor
(RV32I scalar + 128-bit SIMD; in-order even/odd dual-issue)

5-28-2026:

Tool: Vivado simulatiion & Vscode Editor

RISC-V 32-bit instructions formate

RV32I Instruction Set Architecture Deisgned:

    a) fixed 32-bit instruction keeps decode and fetch simpler i.e. no mixed instruction lengths

    b) a 3-address style register fields (rd, rs1, rs2) need less instructions than 2-address

    c) Encoding and Decoding is relatively uniform with the same bit positioning for rs1, rs2, rd, expect sign-extended immediates 

    1) sufficient to form a compiler target,
        - reliably generate neccessary machine code
    2) can support modern operating system environments

    3) Reduce hardware required in a minimal implementation
        - important to test functionally on the Artix-7

    4) ~40 unique instructions 

Instruction File - Base Instruction Formats (R/I/S/U):

    a) IALIGN = 32, each instruction must start at an address that’s a multiple of 2.

    b) Error detection for invalid branch or jump address, raising misaligned exception

    c) uses 8-bit-byte map (USART / memory). PC and word LW/SW use multiple-of-4 offsets.

    Immediates are sign-extended because we did not observe a benefit to using zero extension for
    some immediates as in the MIPS ISA and wanted to keep the ISA as simple as possible.

    Branch and jump targets in RISC‑V are always 2‑byte aligned, 
    - Most ISAs solve this by encoding the immediate normally. Then shifting left by 1 bit in hardware
    
    - RISC‑V rotates the immediate bits in the instruction so that the LSB is always zero in the encoding itself.

        The immediate is already a byte offset

        No hardware shift is needed

        No extra mux is needed

        The decode logic is simpler and cheaper

Integer Computational Instruction

    a) Integer computational instructions are either encoded as register-immediate operations using the I-type
    format or as register-register operations using the R-type format. 

    b) The destination is register rd for both register-immediate and register-register instructions. 
    
    c) No integer computational instructions cause arithmetic exceptions.

    d) No special overflow-detecting arithmetic instructions, simple branch patterns can detect overflow cheaply, without extra hardware.

        add   t0, t1, t2
        bltu  t0, t1, overflow -> raise software expection

        complier decided whether overflow must be checked, inserting overflow branch instruction

Registers File - 32 addressible register:
    // A conventional size that balances encoding, performance, and hardware simplicity
    a) why more entry (>16) reduce presssure for aggressive compiler optimatizations technieuqes(loops, caching) that uses many temporary register

    b) why less entry (<64) a few register dominate in use, get much of the benefits without needing to use all register equally often
    
    1) Register x0 is hardwired with zero

    2) General Purpose registers x1-x31 (RV32I Unprivileged ISA, "Register State")

        ABI / convention (not extra hardware in a minimal core):
        - x1 (ra)  — usual return-address register for JAL / JALR
        - x2 (sp)  — stack pointer
        - x5 (t0)  — may be used as an alternate link register in some code sequences

        RV-DIS: JAL/JALR write the link (pc+4) to whatever GPR rd encodes — no special x1/x5
        hardware; compilers usually pick x1 (ra), but any rd except x0 is valid.

    3) Program counter — 32-bit byte address (Unprivileged ISA: PC is not a GPR)

        Instruction memory: 8-bit byte map (one address = one byte). Each 32-bit instruction
        occupies four byte addresses; fetch assembles ILEN=32 into the instruction register.
        RV-DIS uses PC aligned to 4 bytes for 32-bit instructions (no RVC in base bring-up). 












    

128-bit SIMD Extension (Cell/NEON-style, SPU-Lite):

    a) 128-bit vector width; 8 vector registers v0-v7 (separate from scalar x0-x31)

    b) Lane modes: 16x8-bit, 8x16-bit, 4x32-bit packed integer ops

    c) Even lane: VADD, VSUB, VAND, VOR, VXOR (128-bit SIMD ALU)

    d) Odd lane: VLD128, VST128 (16-byte aligned vector load/store)

    e) Dual-issue example: vector ALU (even) + vector/scalar load (odd) in same cycle


   

    
